HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
relentless wave
of ISIS-claimed bombings in
Baghdad bring
the death toll to nearly 200
just in the last
week. What's behind the latest
spike in violence?
Also ahead: With the race's
finish line in
sight, Democrats in Kentucky and
Oregon cast
their primary vote, but is the
party moving
further apart ahead of the
general election?
Plus, from military artillery
ranges to prisons,
a remarkable story of
transformation and the
unlikely allies of endangered
butterflies.
SUSAN CHRISTOPHER, Butterfly
Technician: When
I watched the butterflies
struggling to come
out of their cocoon out of their
chrysalis,
it really makes me realize that,
yes, we all
do need to struggle to get to
where we need
to be.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The day's two
Democratic
primaries have Hillary Clinton
hoping to avoid
a double defeat, and Bernie
Sanders hoping
to pull out a pair of wins.
In Oregon, it's a vote-by-mail
affair. But
Kentucky's primary day was more
traditional,
with voters giving voice to the
divisions
in the party.
VIRGINIA HUNT, Kentucky
Resident: I think
Hillary stands up for women and
children and
families, and the violence in
our country,
the gun issue, oh, my goodness,
so many issues,
foreign policy. I think she's
well-qualified.
I think she understands families
in this country
and what they need.
KENT LOOFBOURROW, Kentucky
Resident: Partly
because of Hillary's comments on
coal, I think
especially in Eastern Kentucky,
that's going
to be a big deciding factor. And
even people
that I wouldn't have expected to
vote for
Bernie are talking about voting
for him.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Republicans
also voted in
Oregon, with Donald Trump close
to wrapping
up the GOP nomination.
Today, he reported to the
Federal Election
Commission that he's worth more
than $10 billion,
with annual income of $557
million. He's refused,
so far, to release his tax
returns.
We will come back to divisions
on the Democratic
side later in the program.
The U.S. Senate voted today to
let families
of 9/11 victims sue the
government of Saudi
Arabia, setting up a possible
veto showdown.
The Saudis have threatened to
pull billions
of dollars from the U.S. economy
if the measure
becomes law. Senators from both
parties rejected
the warning and passed the bill
by voice vote.
New York Democrat Chuck Schumer
said it sends
a clear message.
SEN. CHARLES SCHUMER (D), New
York: If the
Saudis didn't participate in
this terrorism,
they have nothing to fear about
going to court.
If they did, they should be held
accountable.
It's that simple. And there are
certain moral
things that supersede day-to-day
relationships
between countries.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The White
House argues the
bill could boomerang, and expose
Americans
overseas to legal jeopardy.
Spokesman Josh Earnest:
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
We need to make sure this is --
that we don't
overlook the potential
unintended consequences
of a bill that could put the
United States
at risk around the world. That
is a dangerous
proposition and one that the
commander in
chief, I think, is rightly
concerned about.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
legislation still has
to get through the U.S. House.
It looks as though operator
error was a critical
factor in the Amtrak crash in
Philadelphia
a year ago. The National
Transportation Safety
Board officially concluded today
that the
train's engineer was distracted
by radio traffic.
The train accelerated to 106
miles an hour
going into a sharp curve with a
speed limit
of 50 miles per hour. It
derailed, killing
eight people and injuring
hundreds.
The Justice Department will
investigate state-sponsored
doping by Russian athletes. The
New York Times
reports the focus is on any
Russian officials,
coaches or athletes who violated
drug rules
at competitions in the U.S.
Those who used
the U.S. banking system in the
process could
be targets, too. It's unclear if
Russian authorities
will cooperate.
A move to make young American
women subject
to a military draft has been
sidetracked for
now. The House Rules Committee
today dropped
a provision that women 18 to 25
sign up for
the draft, just as men do.
Conservatives argued
it could present a dangerous
blurring of gender
lines.
The head of the Armed Services
Committee,
Republican Mac Thornberry of
Texas, raised
questions about selective
service overall.
REP. MAC THORNBERRY (R), Texas:
There has
not been a review of whether we
need selective
service since 1994. And so my
strong view
is that we need to ask the big
questions and
figure out whether we need it.
If so, for
what purpose? What would happen
if we did
away with it? If we do have it,
who's going
to be involved?
HARI SREENIVASAN: The U.S. has
not had an
actual military draft since
1973.
The Senate today confirmed Eric
Fanning to
be the secretary of the Army,
the first openly
gay leader of any military
service. He was
approved on a unanimous voice
vote eight months
after President Obama nominated
him for the
job.
The president of Mexico has
proposed legalizing
gay marriage. Enrique Pena Nieto
signed initiatives
to add the provision to the
Mexican Constitution
and the national civil code. The
country's
Supreme Court has ruled it's
unconstitutional
to ban same-sex marriages, but
not all Mexican
states have legalized the
practice.
Racial segregation is getting
worse in America's
public schools. The Government
Accountability
Office reports black and
Hispanic children
are increasingly concentrated,
with few, if
any, white classmates. Those
schools also
offer fewer math, science and
college prep
classes and have higher rates of
suspension
and expulsion.
A separate report today focused
on the state
of black America. We will look
at that later
in the program.
And Wall Street sold off today
on growing
expectations of a new interest
rate hike.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 180
points to close just under
17530. The Nasdaq
fell 59 points, and the S&P 500
dropped 19.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a spike in
violence that's claimed nearly
200 Iraqi's
lives; the deepening divide in
the Democratic
base; Muslim students speak out
as they struggle
to fit in; why higher graduation
rates don't
equal higher incomes for black
Americans;
and much more.
Another day of extreme violence
hit Baghdad
today, as at least 77 people
were killed and
140 wounded in a series of
bombings across
the city.
William Brangham has our report.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The capital
city's largely
Shiite neighborhoods were ground
zero for
this latest carnage. The worst
killing came
in the Shaab district, where a
roadside bomb
detonated at a crowded
marketplace.
When people rushed to help those
victims,
a suicide bomber then attacked.
WATHIQ HASHIM, Iraq (through
translator):
An explosion took place here,
killing a woman,
her brother and her niece. Some
other people
who came to shop were either
killed or wounded.
What crime have innocent people
committed?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It was much
the same in
the sprawling Sadr City
district. A car bomb
left mangled, burned-out
vehicles at an outdoor
market, while a suicide bomber
targeted a
nearby eating place.
MAN (through translator): This
is the second
blast in Sadr city. One is here
and the other
blast was outside a restaurant.
We are fed
up with this violence. The city
has been the
scene of daily explosions.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In all, bombs
ripped through
four different locations across
Baghdad today,
Shaab and Habibiya in the north,
as well as
nearby Sadr City, and the Dora
neighborhood
on the southern side. They're
the latest in
a surge of attacks in and near
Baghdad that
have claimed more than 200 lives
in the last
week alone.
Iraqi officials say ISIS
militants are responsible
and that they're using the
bombings to try
to compensate for ground they
have lost on
the battlefield.
And American officials echo that
belief.
MARK TONER, State Department
Spokesman: The
United States strongly condemns
the barbaric
terrorist attacks in Iraq today
that deliberately
and specifically targeted
civilians.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In Washington,
State Department
spokesman Mark Toner says it's
clear the battle
is far from over against ISIS,
known in Arabic
as Da'esh.
MARK TONER: These attacks are
the latest reminder
of the danger that this group
continues to
pose to all Iraqis, and the
importance of
Iraqi leaders from all
communities to continue
to work together, so that
progress against
Da'esh can continue to be made.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In all, the
Iraqi government
estimates that ISIS still
controls 14 percent
of the nation's territory.
That's down from
40 percent back in 2014, when
the militants
made a lightning advance.
But as Iraqi forces gain ground
in the north
and west, backed by U.S.
airstrikes, the new
violence around Baghdad has put
added strain
on those forces. It could open
the possibility
that Iraqi army units are pulled
from the
front line fighting ISIS to help
secure the
capital.
Any such move could undercut
Iraq's ability
to fight ISIS in the north,
especially as
the Iraqi military pursues its
new offensive
to retake Mosul, the nation's
second largest
city.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We turn to the
race for
the White House.
On the Democratic side, Bernie
Sanders and
Hillary Clinton will face off in
primaries
tonight in Kentucky and Oregon.
But over the
weekend, Clinton and Sanders
supporters were
at odds in Nevada at the state's
Democratic
Convention, potentially
signaling a greater
divide in the party.
Here to help break down the
divide, Susan
Page, Washington bureau chief at
USA Today,
and from Las Vegas, Jon Ralston,
host of "Ralston
Live."
Susan Page, let's start with --
we're having
this conversation because it was
important,
but even just today, there were
a flurry of
communications throughout the
Democratic Party
about the tone and tenor of what
the candidates
should be doing, what their
supporters should
be doing. What happened?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
Well, we saw the Democratic
national chairman,
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, put
out a statement
saying the campaigns need to
address this,
this is unacceptable, it's
troubling, what
happened in Las Vegas.
And then you had Bernie Sanders
put out a
statement that was pretty
defiant. He said
he was against violence, of
course, but he
basically continued his kind of
bill of particulars
about grievances about how the
DNC and others
are treating him and his
supporters and not
treating them fairly, he says.
And then we had Harry Reid, the
leader of
the Democrats in the Senate,
decry that Sanders
hadn't done more to address this
in a serious
way. The concern is not just
what happened
over the weekend in Las Vegas.
The concern
is, is this a precursor to a
divided Democratic
Party as they head into the
national convention
in Philadelphia?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jon Ralston,
fill us in
on what happened over the
weekend in the great
state of Nevada.
JON RALSTON, "Ralston Live":
Yes, it wasn't
such a great state over the
weekend, I guess.
It was a raucous convention. All
conventions
are raucous to some extent, but
the Bernie
Sanders folks went into that
convention determined
to cause trouble because they
thought that
the state party, which
essentially is Harry
Reid, was being unfair to them.
They filed a lawsuit beforehand.
Reid tried
to tamp it down, got Bernie
Sanders to put
out a unity statement. But that
was just a
fool's errand. It had no chance
of working.
And so the problem for the
Bernie Sanders
folks, they had no perspective
on this, is
that they lost. They lost the
caucus on February
20. They managed to flood some
county conventions,
but they didn't get their people
out.
They didn't fill out the close
to 500 delegate
slots for the state convention.
They were
outnumbered, got overruled in
the changes
they were trying to make. And
the real irony
here is, this was only over a
few delegates
that wouldn't have mattered.
And what Susan said is the most
important
point: How much of a harbinger
is this of
what's to come in Philadelphia
in July? I
know a lot of people like to
think of Nevada
as some kind of alien world, but
I think Nevadans
are pretty much like people
everywhere else.
And that could be a real problem
for the Democrats
in Philadelphia.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Susan, we were
expecting
perhaps a contested convention
on the Republican
side, the unexpected to happen,
and now Donald
Trump seems to be walking slowly
towards what
might be a coronation. Right?
But this -- is this -- what we
saw were videos
from cell phones of people,
Bernie Sanders
supporters yelling, recount,
recount in Nevada.
Is this what we're likely to see
in Cleveland?
SUSAN PAGE: It's interesting.
The divisions are much more
serious in the
Republican Party, even though
there is no
question about Donald -- there
is longer any
question that Donald Trump is
going to be
to nominee. There are real
questions about,
what does the Republican Party
stand for going
forward? And he has not been
endorsed by the
top Republican official in the
country yet.
So there are real divisions in
the Republican
Party, but there are real
divisions in the
Democratic Party as well. Some
of them go
to policy. You know, there's
some policy differences
between Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders,
but a lot of them go to kind of,
who do you
want to get things done? Do you
want the most
experienced candidate? That
would be Hillary
Clinton.
Or do you want somebody who
describes himself
as a revolutionary, who is going
to really
shake things up? And Bernie
Sanders has captured
the energy of this party.
Hillary Clinton
has won a majority of the votes
in the primaries.
We shouldn't forget that. She's
very, very
likely to be nominated as the
nominee at the
convention.
But Bernie Sanders is the guy
who has the
enthusiasm and the energy, and
especially
with young voters, so he's not a
force to
be denied at this point. And I
think the Clinton
campaign is still figuring out
how to deal
with that and how to emerge with
a united
party to deal and face Donald
Trump.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jon Ralston,
we have had
folks from both the campaigns on
the program,
saying, you know what, this will
sort itself
out. This is part of the
process.
How much of this is structural?
Right now,
Bernie Sanders supporters still
see Hillary
as the immediate competitor,
whereas Hillary
kind of sees -- she has sort of
pivoted and
sees Donald Trump as the
eventual competitor
and that's where she's focusing
on?
JON RALSTON: Yes, I think it's a
question
of depth, as opposed to breadth,
in this sense.
I don't think this has anything
to do with
policy, what we saw in Nevada
and what's going
on across the country among the
Bernie Sanders
supporters. Sanders tapped into
something
in this country, there's no
doubt. You can
call it anti-establishment. You
can say that
it's millennials getting
involved and wanting
to make change.
But what we saw in Nevada and
what I think
you're seeing now is frustration
and anger
with a process that they see as
slanted against
them and their man. And that is
very, very
difficult to control once it's
unleashed.
And I think you see that Bernie
Sanders now
doesn't think -- doesn't think
he should control
it at this point, because, as
you may have
seen earlier, he put out that
defiant statement
about what happened in Nevada.
And I'm not sure he's going to
be able to
control it in July either, even
if he is standing
up on stage in Philadelphia
holding arm in
arm with Hillary Clinton
declaring unity.
I'm not sure he can control it.
The question,
though, is how broad is it?
I think some of these feelings
are very deep,
but it is 10 percent of Bernie
Sanders supporters,
20, 30? We won't know that until
late July.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And how long
does it take
for them to bury the hatchet,
whichever way
it goes? They have been pretty
tense over
the past few weeks and months.
It's not just
one convention, one week. They
can say, we're
all good, let's go ahead and
attack Donald
Trump.
SUSAN PAGE: You know it's going
to take some
time. As you say, you're not
going to turn
on a dime and have the Bernie
Sanders supporters
say, OK, we're OK with Hillary
Clinton.
In other words, in the exit
polls just a week
ago in West Virginia, about four
in 10 of
Bernie Sanders voters in West
Virginia said
they would vote -- if Bernie
Sanders wasn't
the nominee, if Hillary Clinton
turned out
to be the nominee, they would
vote for Donald
Trump in November.
Now, that's a number that I
think probably
gets reduced if Bernie Sanders
endorses Hillary
Clinton, is enthusiastic about
her as I think
a lot of people expect him to
ultimately be.
But it takes some time to
persuade people
who are now battling with one
another that
they ought to join forces and be
on the same
side.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jon, how much
of it -- in
the people that you have spoken
to, how much
of it is about the two
candidates? As you
said, it's not so much about the
policy right
now.
JON RALSTON: Yes, I do think it
becomes very
personal.
And, you know, campaigns get
very intense.
I think this started almost as a
lark with
some people who were supporting
Bernie Sanders
as a so-called protest against
the anointment
of Hillary Clinton. But now it's
become more
real, as he did better than
people thought
he was going to do, as he's won
all of these
late states.
And now I do think there is a
real anger percolating
out there among the Sanders
folks that, wait
a second, he's being cheated.
Now, that's
not what happened in Nevada, no
matter how
they're portraying it. And the
fact that Sanders
was unwilling to say, you know,
I lost fair
and square, and -- than play
into what his
campaign out here is saying
happened, I think
it's a very, very bad sign.
And, again, I do -- I have very
little confidence
that what he has unleashed can
be so easily
controlled, no matter how
skillful Hillary
Clinton or Debbie Wasserman
Schultz or any
of the rest of the Democratic
establishment
thinks they are.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Jon
Ralston of
"Ralston Live" joining us from
Nevada, and
Susan Page of USA Today, thanks
so much.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Next: a look
at the growing
problem of harassment
Muslim-American students
often face in public schools.
Surveys by the Center on
American-Islamic
Relations, a civil rights group,
suggest that
some 50 percent of Muslim
students have been
bullied by their peers. One hot
spot has been
St. Cloud, Minnesota, a small
city 90 minutes
west of Minneapolis.
John Tulenko of Education Week
reports on
the controversies there and how
the school
district responded.
It's part of our education
series Making the
Grade, which airs Tuesdays on
the "NewsHour."
JOHN TULENKO: Hafsa Abdi, who's
18-years-old,
remembers well the day four
years ago when
she was first bullied for being
Muslim.
HAFSA ABDI, Student: The last
day of by eighth
grade year, I was just going
home, and then
this boy -- I think he was a
year younger
than me -- he pulled off my
hijab. And at
the time, I was wearing a longer
one, so it
was more easy to kind of like
pull off from
the back.
And then I also had like a pin
underneath
to hold it in place. And then
that kind of
came loose. So, like, at the
time I was just
trying to think of like five
different things
at one time, like trying to get
the pin to
not stab me in the neck, and
then turn around
to see who this kid is.
JOHN TULENKO: In high school,
the bullying
continued, especially when she
and other Muslim
students would gather to pray.
HAFSA ABDI: Mostly, the
upperclassmen, they
would come into the bathroom
sometimes and
start fighting with the Somali
girls that
were trying to wash for prayer,
and then when
it gets reported, nothing would
happen.
JOHN TULENKO: What would they
say?
HAFSA ABDI: So they'd be like,
oh, well, why
are you making the bathroom
dirty, you stinky
Somalian or you terrorist or
stuff like that,
or go back to where you came
from.
JOHN TULENKO: Where Hafsa comes
from is Minnesota.
She was born here, after her
parents fled
Somalia to escape civil war.
Thousands of
other East African refugees have
also come
to St. Cloud, changing the face
of this mostly
white, mostly Catholic small
city.
WILLIE JETT, Superintendent, St.
Cloud Area
School District: My job is to
make sure that
all children, whether it's their
children,
whether it's somebody brand-new
to the country,
that they have the best tools
available to
be successful here in America,
here within
our community.
JOHN TULENKO: For superintendent
Willie Jett,
educating the new arrivals
required changes
across the board.
WILLIE JETT: What we have had to
do is start
from ground zero. You're trying
to make sure
that, A, all the different
languages within
school are welcomed.
You're trying to make sure that
you have interpreters.
You're making sure that you're
revamping teaching
staff and support staff and the
way that you
hold conferences, the way that
you send messages
home. It's not what it was 20,
30, 40 years
ago, even 10 years ago.
JOHN TULENKO: But all this
change, in and
out of schools, has stirred
resentment.
WOMAN: There is a lot of racial
prejudice
in our area.
JOHN TULENKO: At this local
coffee shop, the
divisions in the community were
plain to see.
MAN: They think they're
Americans, but when
our forefathers come over, they
blended in
with everyone else. And these
people...
MAN: This is America. They
should be talking
English. But you walk downtown,
and they're
always talking their language.
How in the
hell are we supposed to get to
know them if
we don't know what the hell
they're saying?
MAN: I have not had a difficulty
with the
Somali community. We talk about
ourselves
being American. I don't think
we're very welcoming.
JOHN TULENKO: Similar tensions
had been building
in the high school, until they
came out online.
HAFSA ABDI: They would take
pictures of us.
The one that I can think of most
popular is,
there was this girl who was in a
wheelchair
because she broke her leg, and
she was in
the lunch line waiting. And this
senior boy
who went here last year, he took
a picture
of her and captioned it,
"Handicapped and
ISIS too."
And then he put it on his
Snapchat story.
So, his Snapchat story is
available for everyone
to see. It spread within like 10
minutes,
and the whole school knew about
it.
JOHN TULENKO: Reaction was
swift. Muslim students
walked out of St. Cloud Tech in
spring 2015.
Reports of harassment emerged in
other cities
throughout summer and fall of
last year, especially
after the massacres in San
Bernardino and
Paris, and following candidate
Donald Trump's
call to ban Muslims from
entering the country.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I have had mothers write and say
"My heart
cries every night thinking how
our daughter
might be treated at school."
JOHN TULENKO: The president
addressed the
problem at his first ever visit
to a mosque
in February.
BARACK OBAMA: We are one
American family.
And when any part of our family
starts to
feel separate or second-class or
targeted,
it tears at the very fabric of
our nation.
(APPLAUSE)
MAN: We're coming together to
create a difference
in your school, so everybody in
the school
feels safe and welcomed.
JOHN TULENKO: Back in St. Cloud,
they have
used the year since the walkout
to speak out
against harassment by training
this specially
chosen group of students to go
out and begin
a dialogue with the bullies.
UBAH NOOR, Student: We're trying
to include
people, and we're not going to
sit here and
say, no, your opinion is wrong,
you shouldn't
feel this way and that way about
a culture.
We're trying to educate them, so
that -- in
hopes that they would open up
their minds
and, I guess, change.
JOHN TULENKO: And how they'd go
about changing
minds could be seen in
activities like this
one, in which the students
arranged themselves
according to how far they were
born from St.
Cloud.
Staff member Sebastian
Witherspoon is one
of the group's founders.
What do you want them to learn?
SEBASTIAN WITHERSPOON, St. Cloud
Area School
District: Difference is OK. If
you're from
Somalia, if you're from Duluth
as a black
male, if you're from
Robbinsdale, whatever,
there is beauty in difference.
There's beauty
in coming from different places,
being different
culture, have different
ethnicities.
That's -- to me, that's --
there's education
to me, is having all these
people who have
a variety of experiences and us
learning from
that to enrich our lives.
JOHN TULENKO: Students are also
organizing
a cultural carnival, featuring
food, music,
and clothing from their home
countries. But
in some groups, there are
worries about who
will come.
STUDENT: The people who don't
want to be there
are the people that need to be
there. I mean,
I feel like the people who need
the conversation
aren't the ones that are
actually coming.
JOHN TULENKO: There could be
another approach,
which the president had seemed
to use, and
we brought it up with Hafsa.
Hafsa, I'm wondering maybe the
better approach
would be to educate those
bullies about what
it means to be an American.
HAFSA ABDI: Mm-hmm. I do feel
like it comes
from the stereotype of what an
American looks
like. So, a lot of people feel
someone who
looks like me can't be an
American, because
of my skin color or like a hijab
that I'm
wearing, and that makes me not
American.
So I feel like really actually
do need to
understand the actual definition
of what it
is to be an American.
JOHN TULENKO: But others in the
group weren't
so sure.
What about the notion of
America?
UBAH NOOR: I feel like we have
been teaching
what our country has been
founded on since
elementary school with social
studies, with
U.S. history, with government.
We have been constantly talking
about what
this country is founded on with
liberty, justice,
and the pursuit of happiness,
but it's not
sticking to people. So, we need
to find a
different approach to this.
JOHN TULENKO: So, one year from
the walkout,
how much has changed?
CASEY HILDEN, Student: I have
seen, like,
Muslim people and St. Cloud
natives become
on better terms a little bit,
but it's not
been like super noticeable.
UBAH NOOR: There are other
students that are
stepping out of their way to --
if a Somali
kid is walking in the hallway
and somebody
says something to them, they
might step in
and be like, hey, that's not
funny. And I
have noticed like that happen
every once in
awhile, and I feel like,
gradually, it's changing.
JOHN TULENKO: It's a start on
what's likely
a long-term project.
In St. Cloud, Minnesota, I'm
John Tulenko
of Education Week, reporting for
the "PBS
NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
Episcopal
Church's first African-American
presiding
bishop explains why acting like
Christ would
change the nation's politics;
plus, an unusual
sanctuary for an endangered
butterfly.
But, first, the National Urban
League has
released the 40th edition of its
annual State
of Black America Report. It's
designed to
provide a snapshot of where
African-Americans
are relative to whites.
According to the most recent
report's calculations,
across multiple facets of life,
African-Americans
experience equality at a rate of
72 percent,
compared to white Americans, who
score 100
percent.
Here to explain is Marc Morial,
president
and CEO of the National Urban
League.
So, let's start with that 72
percent number.
How do you get there? What does
that mean?
MARC MORIAL, President, National
Urban League:
What it means is, if you compare
things like
unemployment, home ownership,
high school
graduation rates, college
attainment rates,
median income,
African-Americans, on average,
achieve 72 percent that of where
whites are.
These are collective numbers. We
also do the
same comparison for Latinos.
Latinos are at
about 77 percent, whites being,
of course,
100 percent. So, it's designed
to make our
discussion about persistent
racial inequality
precise, based on numbers, based
on facts,
and based on clarity.
So, we report this information
every year.
This is the 40th year that we
have done it.
And we not only report the
information, Hari,
but we also propose solutions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
indicators or
one of the factors is income
inequality, the
gap there. One of the largest
income disparities
that you point out, at least
between black
and white families, is in the
Minneapolis
metro area.
The average household income for
a black family
there is just over a third, 37.8
percent,
of the average household income
for a white
family. How does this happen?
MARC MORIAL: This happens
because the better-paying
jobs, the higher-level jobs go
to whites,
and African-Americans are stuck
in lower-paying
jobs on an overall basis.
And we see this glaring
disparity in places
like Minneapolis. It's also
present in places
like San Francisco, where there
is a tremendous
amount of success, a highly
educated work
force. African-Americans are
far, far behind.
I hope that what this means is
that, in a
city like Minneapolis or a city
like San Francisco,
they won't sweep these numbers
under the rug,
they won't pretend that they
don't exist,
and they will recognize and see
it as a challenge
for the civic, business and
political leadership
of those communities to try to
address these
disparities.
These disparities exist in
virtually every
major American metropolitan
area. It is just
a question of to what degree.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
interesting things
that you mentioned earlier today
was that
there was actually an era in the
United States
where African-Americans were
considered three-fifths
of a person, right?
And here you have this snapshot
of how African-Americans
are doing over the last 40
years. And looking
back across this, at income
inequality, I'm
struck by the fact that, in
1976, the average
black family nationwide earned
59 percent
of what a white family did. Now,
40 years
later, it hasn't gotten much
better, 60 percent.
What's behind the stagnation?
MARC MORIAL: Notwithstanding the
political
progress, the progress that's
been made in
terms of high school graduation
rates, number
of African-Americans who have
attained college
and great individualized
success, this is
a persistent, structural,
locked-in economic
situation.
And I believe, Hari, that we
highlight it
because it defines the pressing
challenge
of the American future. For
Latinos -- and
Latinos and African-Americans
are almost a
third of the population in this
country -- Latinos
don't fare much better than
African-Americans.
This is an important challenge
for America's
political business and civic
leaders, to figure
out, to concentrate on how to
end these persistent
economic inequities in the
United States.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There is a
little bit of
an upside in some of these
numbers.
Higher educational achievement,
that's an
movement. Forty years ago, 6.6
percent of
black people had a bachelor's
degree or more.
That's 43 percent of the number
of whites
with those degrees. But, today,
that percentage
is up to 63 percent.
So, what led to the increase?
And how is it
affecting the black community?
MARC MORIAL: So, I think those
increases were
a result of policies that began
in the 1960s
and the 1970s, the Pell Grant
program, affirmative
action, and higher education
admissions, the
desegregation of schools, and
the focus on
educational -- and improving
educational standards.
Much of what we have done in the
educational
arena, where there's been a
focus on civil
rights and economic injustice,
if you will,
has begun to make a difference.
We see it
indeed in the numbers. But it
has not -- I
repeat -- has not significantly
translated
to the economic arena.
And this is why the Main Street
Marshall Plan,
which reflects our plan to
address this, suggests
a commitment of a trillion
dollars over five
years to begin to address some
of these deep
inequities, is our effort to
say, let's not
get bogged down in just an
analysis and a
diagnosis of the problem.
Let's also focus and figure on
how to change
it. Now, this is what we also
saw in the numbers.
From 1963 to 1976, that 13-year
period during
the years in the war on poverty
and at the
height of the post-civil rights
era, we actually
made tremendous change in
America.
The poverty rate went down.
Income inequality
narrowed. But then, at 1976, it
got stuck.
And the disparities of '76 have
become the
disparities of 2016. Now, we
don't know the
effect of the recession, if we
had not had
the 2008-2009 recession, if, in
fact, the
challenges or the disparities
would be less.
We're not sure of that fact.
The fact of the matter is, the
disparities
exist. It presents the challenge
for this
nation for our 21st century.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right. You
can go online
to read the Main Street, new
Marshall Plan,
so to speak.
Thank you very much more joining
us, Marc
Morial.
MARC MORIAL: Thanks, Hari.
Appreciate it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Most
Reverend Michael
Curry became presiding bishop of
the Episcopal
Church last November, becoming
the head of
one of the United States' oldest
denominations
at a time of conflict and
change.
The church, like most mainline
Protestant
denominations, has been facing
declines in
membership for decades.
Judy Woodruff sat down with
Bishop Curry to
learn how he is leading a church
facing these
challenges.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bishop Michael
Curry, thank
you for talking to us.
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY, Presiding
Bishop, Episcopal Church: Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
congratulations on your
position.
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY: Thank
you for that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
first, how would
you describe the place that the
Episcopal
Church occupies in the broad
religious profile
that we have the United States
now?
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY: The
Episcopal Church probably
represents a moderate
voice, a centrist voice in the
religious landscape.
We're a tradition that has
historically been
able to live with differences.
And I think
now we're seeing the live that
out in some
new ways that -- to be a church
that really
can embrace diverse, not only
theological
traditions or liturgical and
worship styles
and approaches, but people of
all stripes
and types.
And that's -- I think that's the
Episcopal
Church and the Anglican way at
its best.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're now six
months into
this position. How has the fact
that you are
the first black presiding bishop
of the Episcopal
Church of the United States, a
descendant
of slaves, how has that affected
what you
have been able to do so far?
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY: Certainly,
that has affected, only in the
sense that
it is a first. Beyond that, I
have a funny
feeling I was probably elected
for a variety
of reasons.
I suspect that my election was a
moment of
hope that we could begin to help
the Episcopal
Church and Episcopalians begin
to focus outward
in some new ways, outward in
ways that actually
share the message of Jesus of
Nazareth, which
is fundamentally a message of
love of God
and love of neighbor.
And that's a game-changer, in
and of itself,
the various forms and ways we're
divided between
each other, whether it is racial
or socioeconomic
or political or religious or
tribal or national
or on and on and on, helping
this church to
become instruments of God's work
of reconciliation
in this world.
That really does have something
to do with
helping the world stop living a
nightmare
and start living something
closer to God's
dream. And that's worth doing.
And I have
a feeling that's why I got
elected.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have spoken a
great deal
and preached about social
justice in its many
different forms.
How does that fit into what you
see as maybe
this developing, evolving vision
and mission
of the Episcopal Church?
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY: Scholars,
sometimes, when they look at the
origins of
Christianity, they often use the
phrase the
Jesus movement as a way of
describing what
Jesus of Nazareth actually was
doing in the
earliest days in Palestine, that
the Jesus
movement in the first and second
and third
centuries was a movement of
people who gathered
around the teachings of Jesus of
Nazareth.
And their gathering around and
committing
themselves to that way of life
that Jesus
talked about became
transformative for themselves
and for the world. And, as a
result, the earliest
Christian communities were
communities where
both slave and free coexisted
and lived together,
where men and women, where Jew
and Greek or
Gentile coexisted and lived
together.
That was the earliest Christian
movement.
And I'm committed to helping the
Episcopal
Church become a Jesus movement
today that
helps the society live into a
vision.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What's the
practical effect
of that? I mean, how would
people's lives
change as a result of that,
ideally?
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY: I
think dramatically.
Imagine if just Episcopalians
were practically
living their daily lives as
reflections of
the way Jesus of Nazareth lived
his, loving
in the same way that Jesus did
and does, giving
in the same way, forgiving,
doing justice,
caring, living compassionate
lives.
I have a funny feeling
Episcopalians could
be transformative both in our
interpersonal
relationships and in our social
and political
relationships. What would happen
if Christians
just acted like Christians? It
would change
our politics. It would change
our social order.
It could change our global
community.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think our
politics needs
changing?
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY: Regardless
of which side of the aisle
you're on -- this
isn't a partisan statement --
imagine our
politics if we began to engage
one another
not from the perspective of my
unenlightened
self-interest, but from the
perspective of
our interests, the common good,
the common
wheel.
Imagine our global politics.
Imagine our economic
relationships. It's
world-changing. And I
happen to believe that the way
of Jesus of
Nazareth -- I'm not talking
about everybody
having to become an
Episcopalian, although
that would be nice -- but that's
not what
I'm really talking about.
I'm talking about a way of
living that is
deeply grounded in the kind of
love that is
not a greeting card for
Valentine's Day, but
that is a way of living in this
world and
engaging it.
Finally, Isaiah got caught up
like in the
spirit, like a Episcopalian in a
Baptist church,
got caught up in the spirit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They say that
Sunday morning
is the most segregated time and
place in American
life, in church service in this
country. Should
that change?
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY: I
think the church can create
space for authentic
ethnic congregations that
minister to a particular
need, especially at a particular
time.
But it must also move into
inhabiting or creating
space for congregations where
people of different
races and ethnic backgrounds and
socioeconomic
classes actually come together,
because, ultimately,
I mean, I do pray for the day
when those of
us who have the same commitment
to follow
the way of Jesus of Nazareth can
actually
find that that is our primal
commitment, and
that, in Christ, there is no
hindrances.
In Christ, there is east nor
west, in him,
no south nor north.
We are going to get there. And I
pray for
that day and have worked for
that day, but
I know that, between here and
there, we have
to approximate it as best we
can.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have learned
just recently
that Pope Francis is saying that
he is open
to the idea of a commission to
study permitting
women to become deacons in the
Catholic Church.
What would you say is the
experience of the
Episcopal Church that might
inform what the
Catholics may be thinking about?
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY: When
we finally get to the point of
saying, who
has God called to be a bishop or
a priest
or a deacon, and we're going to
follow that
leading, what we have found over
time is,
guess what? A priest is a
priest. A deacon
is a deacon. A bishop is a
bishop.
They may be black, white, red,
yellow or brown.
They may be a Republican or a
Democrat. They
may be a man or a woman. They
may be gay or
straight, bisexual, transgender.
They may
be a whole host of things, but
they're a priest.
They're a bishop. They're a
deacon.
That's been our experience for
not everyone,
but for most of us. And the
church has been
enriched when all voices are
there, when we're
all there together. We got a
better shot of
making it together than we do
when we're all
apart.
So, I -- you know, my Catholic
brothers and
sisters, you have to make your
decision as
God leads you. This is how we
have made ours,
and we have been blessed.
God has not given up on this
world. We dare
not give up on it either. And
God is not finished
with this church. God has work
for us to do.
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY: We
have a better Episcopal Church.
I have been
in the Episcopal Church my whole
life. We
are a better Episcopal Church
because we really
are trying to welcome all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Presiding Bishop
Michael Curry,
thank you very much.
MDNM /THE MOST REVEREND MICHAEL
CURRY: Thank
you. God bless you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to a
remarkable story
of transformation and the
unlikely allies
of an endangered butterfly.
A recent U.N. report warned some
40 percent
of pollinators, birds, bees and
butterflies,
are at risk of extinction.
Humans are the
driving force behind the
decline.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
reports on
a unique effort in the U.S. that
leads to
more than flowers blossoming.
CAT WISE: The artillery practice
range at
Joint Base Lewis-McChord near
Seattle, Washington,
is not a place you would expect
to be ideal
habitat for an endangered
species. But it
is.
Meet the Taylor's checkerspot
butterfly. Ten
years ago, this beautiful insect
was on the
brink of extinction; 99 percent
of its native
prairie habitat in the Pacific
Northwest and
British Columbia has been lost
to urban and
agricultural development. The
only location
it could be found was here on
the artillery
range.
Why? Well, it turns out that
bombs actually
benefit this butterfly.
DAN GROSBOLL, Insect Biologist,
Joint Base
Lewis-McChord: If you're an
individual butterfly
that has an artillery shell land
on you, it's
bad, but if you zoom out from
that small-scale
impact, and look at the way that
the training
ignites fires across the
landscape, and improves
the habitat across the
landscape, overall,
it is likely good for the
butterfly population.
CAT WISE: Dan Grosboll is an
insect biologist
at the base who has to be very,
very careful
when he's out looking for
butterflies amid
artillery shells.
DAN GROSBOLL: They have a very
brief adult
life span. And the rest of the
life span,
the whole rest of the year,
they're eggs or
larvae.
CAT WISE: Grosboll and a team of
other government
scientists are now working to
boost the numbers
of butterflies here, but there's
only so much
they can do when this land is
needed for other
purposes.
DAN GROSBOLL: The base is here
in order to
support troops training, so the
troops are
ready to go and fight. The fact
that we also
can provide habitat for
endangered species
is a really good thing, but it's
important
that all of the preservation of
endangered
species is not borne by the
base.
CAT WISE: So, the military
sought out help
from an unlikely group who
happen to have
a lot of time on their hands.
On a recent morning, a small
team of inmates
at the Mission Creek Corrections
Center for
women walked into a greenhouse,
known as the
Butterfly Lab, and quickly got
to work. The
greenhouse, which sits just
outside the walls
of the minimum-security prison,
was built
five years ago with funding from
the Department
of Defense.
Now these women, whose lives
have all taken
a wrong turn at some point, have
become leading
experts in the field of captive
butterfly
breeding.
Susan Christopher ended up here
after making
some bad decisions to support a
gambling habit.
Now, after going through some
extensive training
on butterfly rearing, she's
fully engaged
in a more productive and
important endeavor.
SUSAN CHRISTOPHER, Butterfly
Technician: We
came up with this diagram so
that we could
keep our major lines separate
through our
breeding program. The male from
this line
will get bred to females of this
line, so
we continue to move through that
circle, so
that we never breed the same
line to itself.
CAT WISE: And why is that
important?
SUSAN CHRISTOPHER: For genetic
reasons. We
want to have as much genetic
diversity, and
not have the chance of
interbreeding.
CAT WISE: The women, who are
called butterfly
technicians, are raising the
insects throughout
their multiple life stages, so
they can be
released back into the wild. It
takes a lot
of patience, and a loving touch.
WOMAN: And that's honey solution
on the Q-tip.
CAT WISE: And they have been
very successful.
More than 30,000 Taylor's
checkerspots have
been raised for release by this
facility and
the Oregon Zoo, which has a
similar breeding
program.
WOMAN: I have gone one, two eggs
for sure.
CAT WISE: On the day we visited,
Cynthia Fetterly
(ph) and Jessica Stevens (ph)
were working
together on a very delicate
project, harvesting
the tiny eggs that a female
Taylor's checkerspot
had recently laid.
WOMAN: The one I just got done
finished doing
was from the wild, and we
weren't sure if
we were going to be getting any
eggs off of
them because they already look
like they have
been pretty spent. So, getting
that big cluster
of eggs was really exciting.
It's very rewarding, and it's
hard to explain
when you can actually help bring
back an endangered
species. It's very humbling to
be able to
do that.
CAT WISE: The butterfly breeding
program at
Mission Creek is part of a
larger effort in
Washington state called the
Sustainability
in Prisons Project to connect
inmates with
science and nature projects
while they are
serving time. It's a joint
endeavor by the
Washington Department of
Corrections and the
Evergreen State College.
KELLI BUSH, Sustainability in
Prisons Project:
So, we have programs all across
the state.
Kelli Bush is the program
manager for the
project, and she says the
benefits go beyond
the prison walls.
KELLI BUSH: It seems to be
changing lives,
not just the incarcerated
individuals, but
corrections staff, and
biologists, that everyone
involved seems to be feeling
good about the
work and the contributions that
are being
made through these efforts.
MARY LINDERS, Washington
Department of Fish
and Wildlife: Oh, yes, here,
they're on this
side. When the larvae hatch,
they will actually
just start feeding on those
leaves that it's
on.
CAT WISE: One of those who is
benefiting from
the butterfly technicians' hard
work is Mary
Linders, a state biologist who
has been spearheading
efforts to increase the
butterfly's habitat,
and numbers, around Puget Sound.
She says, initially, she wasn't
sure how it
would be to work with inmates.
MARY LINDERS: It's very
detail-oriented work.
You really need a lot of
consistency in the
people that are actually working
on it, so
it was a risk. But it has proved
to be a tremendous
success. The folks at the prison
have done
just a fabulous job of running a
top-notch
facility.
CAT WISE: Linders and a group of
scientists
and volunteers recently gathered
to release
captive raised caterpillars in a
wildlife
area near Olympia, Washington.
And for the first time since the
program began,
they were joined by two inmates
who had raised
many of those insects.
MARY LINDERS: Bugs are -- we
have bugs in
the car. Do you guys want to
help get them
out?
WOMAN: Yes, absolutely.
MARY LINDERS: There's your baby.
CAT WISE: After getting a
tutorial from Linders
about where and how to place the
bugs...
MARY LINDERS: What you're going
to do is release
these in groups of two to five.
So, you can
go ahead and even just brush
them right off
the lid.
CAT WISE: ... inmates Michelle
Dittamore and
Eva Ortiz began to release their
fuzzy friends,
with mixed emotions.
MICHELLE DITTAMORE, Butterfly
Technician:
I feel like it's a lot like your
teenager
flying the coop to go to
college, and you're
just like, I have literally
bathed you, I
have dressed you, I have done
your laundry,
I have packed your lunch.
But I have to have faith that
there's been
so many generations of just
instinct bred
into these little guys that
they're just -- they're
going to get down there, and
they're just
going to know what to do.
CAT WISE: Also helping out at
the release,
Carolina Landa. Landa was
released from the
correctional facility last year
after serving
time for a drug offense.
But she's now enrolled in the
Evergreen State
College environmental science
program, a big
change of direction she
attributes to her
time spent with the butterflies.
CAROLINA LANDA, Evergreen State
College: Here
is an endangered species, and
the fact that
they were saying, yes, we trust
you, yes,
we believe that you can do this
work, and
so that very much played a big
factor in also
me believing in myself, right,
to start that
path.
CAT WISE: The combined efforts
of all the
various individuals and groups
are paying
off. At this release site, the
butterfly population
has doubled since last year to
several thousand.
And at Joint Base Lewis-McChord,
the population
has just been deemed to be
self-sustaining,
a significant milestone for the
species.
Back at the prison greenhouse,
Susan Christopher
says she's learned some valuable
lessons from
the butterflies.
SUSAN CHRISTOPHER: When I
watched the butterflies
struggling to come out of their
cocoon out
of their chrysalis, it really
makes me realize
that, yes, we all do need to
struggle to get
to where we need to be.
CAT WISE: Christopher and her
colleagues are
now gearing up for a busy summer
caring for
some very hungry caterpillars.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Washington
state.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And finally
tonight, our
"NewsHour" Shares, something
that caught our
eye that might be of interest to
you, too.
In the waters near Caesarea,
Israel, two casual
scuba divers made the discovery
of a lifetime
last month when they spotted a
bronze statue.
The duo had stumbled upon the
remains of a
1,600-year-old Roman shipwreck
and the largest
cache of underwater artifacts
found in Israel
in 30 years.
They alerted local
archaeologists, who later
recovered bronze busts, oil
lamps and thousands
of coins bearing the faces of
Roman emperors
from the wreckage.
And we mark the passing of the
world's longest
serving symphony musician.
Bassist Jane Little
first debuted with the Atlanta
Symphony Orchestra
in 1945, when she was just 16.
Little was
still performing with the
organization 71
years later, when she collapsed
on stage Sunday
during the evening's encore of
"There's No
Business Like Show Business."
She later died
at a local hospital. Jane Little
was 87 years
old.
Plus, tonight on "Frontline," a
revealing
documentary about the rise of
Islamic State
militants. "The Secret History
of ISIS" takes
a critical look at decisions
taken by the
U.S. and its allies and how they
may have
fomented sectarian tensions
among Iraqis,
allowing extremist leader Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi
to recruit thousands and take up
arms.
NARRATOR: Back in Raqqa,
Baghdadi was pursuing
a new opportunity, the expansion
of ISIS into
Iraq.
RICHARD CLARKE, Former U.S.
Counterterrorism
Official: At this very time that
al-Baghdadi
is building his organization in
Syria, the
Baghdad government, the Shia
government and
al-Maliki, starts virtually
assaulting the
Sunni homeland.
NARRATOR: In the years since the
American
troops had left, Iraq's prime
minister, Nouri
al-Maliki, a Shia, had initiated
a crackdown
on the Sunni population.
WILLIAM MCCANTS, Brookings
Institution: The
Sunni-Arab tribes in Iraq had
become disillusioned
with the Shia-dominated
government in Baghdad,
so there was widespread
disaffection among
the tribes. They began to engage
in a series
of protests against the regime.
EMMA SKY, Author, "The
Unraveling": These
protests were violently crushed,
and in such
an environment, that enabled
Islamic State
of Iraq to rise up out of the
ashes and say,
we will protect Sunnis from
Maliki.
NARRATOR: It was the moment
al-Baghdadi had
been waiting for.
RICHARD CLARKE: Where had the
Sunnis to go?
There's only one place they can
go? And it
is that residual of the
insurgency that is
now run by al-Baghdadi.
NARRATOR: In early 2014,
Baghdadi's forces
began the campaign the take
Iraq.
DEXTER FILKINS, Author, "The
Forever War":
The Iraqi army, which was built
at the incredible
expense -- I don't even know
what the final
price tag was, $30 billion --
largely by the
Americans, paid for by the
American taxpayer,
you know, all their equipment,
everything,
it all came apart.
NARRATOR: In no time at all,
they rolled over
Fallujah, Ramadi, then the
biggest prize yet,
Iraq's second largest city,
Mosul.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Watch
"Frontline" tonight
on most PBS stations. Check your
local listings.
And later tonight, "Point Taken"
tackles the
complex role of the U.S. in the
Middle East.
Again, the day's top story:
Kentucky and Oregon
held Democratic primaries, with
Hillary Clinton
hoping to avoid a double defeat
at the hands
of Bernie Sanders. Clinton is
virtually assured
of winning the party's
nomination, but Sanders
says he will take the fight to
the convention.
Meanwhile, Republican Donald
Trump filed a
new financial disclosure form
with the Federal
Election Commission. It said
he's worth more
than $10 billion, with annual
income of $557
million.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Our names
are one of the first words we
learn to say
and the way we identify
ourselves to the world.
So what if your teacher doesn't
pronounce
your name correctly? From our
partners at
Education Week, a look at how
that can affect
children and their educational
outcomes.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you. Have a good night.